---
layout: post
title: How to Learn Effectively
---

When I started my 7 month journey at the [Turing School of Software &
Design](http://turing.io/) I was worried that my health would take a significant
nosedive during the intensive program. Luckily, some of the instructors break
the lectures up into 25 minute segments known as Pomodoros (or Pomodori if
you're Italian). Pomodoros are the result of research that has shown people tend
to learn and retain information better when they break up their learning,
traditionally into 25 minute segments with 5 minute breaks in between. That is
about the extent to which the [Pomodoro
Technique](http://pomodorotechnique.com/) is used at Turing. There is little
mandate on how to effectively utilize these breaks.

One of my classmates, [Justin Holzmann](http://www.justinholzmann.com/), and I
somehow started doing pushups and air squats during our Pomodoro breaks. (I
think it may have started after I brought up that I had begun doing [7 Minute
Workouts](http://well.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/05/09/the-scientific-7-minute-workout/)
in preparation for starting at Turing.) I later modified these to plyometric
pushups and squats, and we added the occasional pullups after one of our
instructors told us about a climbing training board mounted in one of the
classrooms. A few other students would join in every now and then, but for the
most part people would just laugh or look at us like we were crazy. As silly as
we may look, I am happy we started doing these simple exercises during our
Pomodoro breaks.

*UPDATE: Unfortunately, Turing School began frowning upon exercising during
Pomodoro breaks.*

Research has shown that [sitting for long periods of time is bad for your
health](http://www.juststand.org/tabid/674/default.aspx). Even exercising an
hour at the gym each day cannot make up for the damage done sitting all day at
work or school. You must get up and move around regularly. Getting up every 25
minutes helps with this. Not only do we get up out of our chairs, we get a small
amount of simple exercise done each break. This adds up throughout each day. Our
quick 10-15 rep exercises can add up to a cumulative total of 200+ pushups and
squats each day!

Even if we didn't do pushups and squats, just getting up out of our seats for 5
minutes to walk around, get a drink of water, take our mind off of things,
and/or socialize provided immense benefits. **The absolute worst thing you can
do with your Pomodoro break is to continue sitting or staring at your computer
screen.**

We intuitively knew this already, but a post I read on the official Pomodoro
Technique website confirmed that what were doing was right:
[http://pomodorotechnique.com/pomodoro-technique-short-break/](http://pomodorotechnique.com/pomodoro-technique-short-break/)

So start doing your Pomodoros each day, and *respect* the Pomorodo break.

If you want a good, simple, *free* Pomodoro timer for your Mac, check out
[Pomodoro One](https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/pomodoro-one/id907364780). It's
what many of us use at Turing.
